# Outage post-mortem

On Friday evening our service went down during scheduled maintenance. The service was back up and running about three hours later, with core service fully restored by 4:40 PM PT on Sunday.

For the past couple of days, we've been working around the clock to restore full access as soon as possible. Though we've shared some brief updates along the way, we owe you a detailed explanation of what happened and what we've learned.

## What happened?

We use thousands of databases to run Dropbox. Each database has one master and two replica machines for redundancy. In addition, we perform full and incremental data backups and store them in a separate environment.

On Friday at 5:30 PM PT, we had a planned maintenance scheduled to upgrade the OS on some of our machines. During this process, the upgrade script checks to make sure there is no active data on the machine before installing the new OS.

A subtle bug in the script caused the command to reinstall a small number of active machines. Unfortunately, some master-replica pairs were impacted which resulted in the site going down.

Your files were never at risk during the outage. These databases do not contain file data. We use them to provide some of our features (for example, photo album sharing, camera uploads, and some API features).

To restore service as fast as possible, we performed the recovery from our backups. We were able to restore most functionality within 3 hours, but the large size of some of our databases slowed recovery, and it took until 4:40 PM PT today for core service to fully return.

## What did we learn?

### Distributed state verification

Over the past few years our infrastructure has grown rapidly to support hundreds of millions of users. We routinely upgrade and repurpose our machines. When doing so, we run scripts that remotely verify the production state of each machine. In this case, a bug in the script caused the upgrade to run on a handful of machines serving production traffic.

We've since added an additional layer of checks that require machines to locally verify their state before executing incoming commands. This enables machines that self-identify as running critical processes to refuse potentially destructive operations.

### Faster disaster recovery

When running infrastructure at large scale, the standard practice of running multiple replicas provides redundancy. However, should those replicas fail, the only option is to restore from backup. The standard tool used to recover MySQL data from backups is slow when dealing with large data sets.

To speed up our recovery, we developed a tool that parallelizes the replay of binary logs. This enables much faster recovery from large MySQL backups. We plan to open source this tool so others can benefit from what we've learned.

We know you rely on Dropbox to get things done, and we're very sorry for the disruption. We wanted to share these technical details to shed some light on what we're doing in response. Thanks for your patience and support.

Akhil
Head of Infrastructure